Max Principle is talked about as an extraneous principle. It is not part of any standard
theories of physics today. There's a reason for that which I, when I first realized this,
I was really amazed. Max Principle implies that there is one universal frame, one universe
because Max Principle trace the effects of dynamics centrifugal force and things like that
happens because of some interaction with the rest of the matter in the universe.
Whatever that interaction is, since universe is one reference frame, accepting Max Principle
immediately implies accepting an absolute frame like ether and so on. But once you accept an
absolute frame, the direct consequence is that propagation of light is Galilean. The velocity,
relative velocity of light will depend on the velocity of the observer. So Max Principle
cannot be incorporated in current physics without breaking Einstein's theory, without
flowing away Einstein's theory of relativity. Welcome back to Demystify Psi. Soon to be named
something else, we are actually considering expanding our name to include more of the topics
we explore on this show, which clearly reaches way beyond science and even mysticism. So we are
playing with new ideas. So look forward to Demystify Psi having a new flavor to its name very soon.
We're going to start rolling that out and trying out some ideas and discussing it with our patrons.
Suggestions are welcome.
Today on the show, we are exploring the underlying assumptions of relativity and some
contradictory experimental evidence with respect to special relativity. So the invariance of the
speed of light, this idea that the speed of light is the same for everybody regardless of their
motion. And today we have CS Unikrishnan from the Defense Institute of Advanced Technology in
India. He is a physics scholar who has worked on the LIGO projects, and he has come to some
very startling realizations concerning the history of physics and the way that we have applied our
foundational assumptions to the picture of how the universe works. And in particular,
he's very concerned about this idea of descriptions, these empirically defined equations being
mistaken for explanations because there's a number of abstract postulates that are roped into them
from the beginning. And of course, descriptions can be very, very deceptive, right? You can watch a
magic show with David Copperfield and be absolutely convinced that the Statue of Liberty disappeared.
It might look like that from every conceivable angle in the audience, but there's something
else happening. And it's the job of the scientist to come up with hypotheses for what that something
could be. And so we're exploring this issue in depth over the course of his conception of how
this can be rescued by bringing in Mach's principle and really understanding that there's a lot of
stuff in the universe that we can't see. It's really far away, but it does exert gravitational
effects en masse. And those things should be applied to all of our fundamental understandings
and interpretations of these bizarre relativistic experiments. Absolutely. And if you like what
we do, come over to patreon.com slash demystifyci. You can help us brainstorm a new name. You can
help us by supporting the podcast with just a couple dollars a month. And in return for that,
we give you both of the episodes early, so you get them on Saturdays instead of having to wait
until everybody else gets them. But you also get to join our Patreon chat, which is a Zoom call
that we have every week where we get together and we talk about the larger, bigger questions that
people are curious about. And it's pretty cool. We have maybe a consistent group of like 15 people
that come and there's probably another five or six that just hang out in the chat. And so it
gives us a chance to actually connect with one another. So this is less of a isolating and
atomized project. One way street. Yeah, it's less of a one way street. So if you have a couple
dollars to spare, come over to patreon.com. We would absolutely love to see you and get your
support. And in the meantime, enjoy our conversation with Professor Anikrishnan. We'll see you next
The Scientific Revolution starts now.
All right, so to kick this off into the science, I was hoping that I could read a little portion
of one of the papers you sent us. And maybe we can springboard off that into what we were
talking about today, which is fundamentally a conversation about revisiting old experiments,
revisiting tried and true theories and considering their interpretation. There's a
philosophical dimension of this, which is really interesting to us, because as we've been over,
over and over and over on this show, empiricism really just shows you how a pattern unfolds.
It doesn't necessarily give you an explanation of the cause of that pattern. And physics has
been extraordinarily successful with detailing these patterns and equations and coming up with these,
they call them theories, but they're really just these statements of how predictable events unfold
at different places in the universe at different scales. And one of the most successful theories,
kind of the bedrock of modern physics is Einstein's relativity. And what we're going to be talking about
today is the strange implications of relativity and how they might be just misunderstanding. So
I'm going to read a little paper, little piece of this paper, I'm going to just skip through a
couple of excerpts, people should go read it themselves. It's called a new gravitational
paradigm for relativity and dynamics and its philosophical scope. And this is from Journal
of Physics conference series. And so the piece that I wanted to share to kick this off, it goes like
this. Einstein's theories are interpreted not only as the theories of relativity and gravity,
but also as the theories of space and time themselves. And then skipping forward. While these
are factually, let's say, let's say spatial intervals between material particles and the
duration marked by material clocks, the essential and crucial role of the material markers is dropped
at the level of abstraction without logical rigor. And then it goes on, the unobservable
space time is elevated to a full fledged dynamical entity in the general theory of relativity.
So that there's a creation of this abstraction being turned into a physical substance. And then
to close out the little excerpt, you say, in real physical terms, all observable experiences of
gravity are limited to matter affecting spatial separation between material particles and the
rate of material clocks. So there's this divergence from material representations of reality and
theoretical abstractions. There's some confusion, some conflation of abstractions with material
reality that's at the core of this discussion. And so before we get into all of the disagreements
with the interpretation, maybe you can just comment on why it matters. Who cares if people
have made these mistakes, treating these abstractions as physical substances and so forth?
Why does it matter? Because the math works. Okay. Yeah, the math works, that is true.
The point is, it is not only we observe various phenomena. So
one doesn't have to really explain the phenomena to observe the phenomena and even describe it
in ordinary language or even convert those phenomena into technologies. You don't have to
really understand it theoretically, completely. Yet it is in our, it's our urge that we want to
understand it more deeply, closely. And we form theories in the sense we try to connect up
various phenomena and describe them on the basis of a few fundamental concepts.
So space and time are two fundamental concepts, which we start with for describing dynamics,
something, some object moving. Of course, it's always the matter object which is moving,
because we can, that is all what we can experience. But to describe that motion,
we need some reference that a particle moved from one position to other position.
And how do you talk about this position? Positions in space. Space is our experience,
in the sense we leave in space. And time is something which we experience as evolution of
ourselves, evolution of our environment and so on, which we call time. So when we say time passes,
what we mean is something evolves. Something changed. Something changed. So space and time
has two essential concepts that was always needed to describe motion. Now when I talk about motion,
movements, it is just not physical movement of some particle in space. It's also used as a
general time for evolution change. Now, so space and time. Now, if you imagine
Before you go on, can I ask you a quick question? How do you conceptualize motion without, sorry,
evolution or change without some particle being relocated?
You cannot. In fact, that is a point. Suppose you imagine a situation where there is no
matter at all, nothing, nothing material. Now, you may be able to imagine space without matter.
At least some people will be in a coordinate sense or something like that.
Something when you say imagine empty space, people may be able to imagine empty space,
but you will not be able to imagine time without any matter. There should be at least one particle
which is evolving, which is moving. Only there has to be some particle for some matter
in which we can experience, which is changing. Either it is changing its position,
or it is changing some property like its temperature or something. Something should change.
Would it be fair to say that you need two particles because you have to compare that
motion to some standard of reference? Exactly. So therefore, one of the motions,
when you said, when you refer to time, every time, every instance, when you refer to time,
what you are doing is to compare one kind of motion with another kind of motion. One of them you
use as a standard, something which is simpler. Maybe it is a periodic motion of something
which you take as a standard. Otherwise, you are always comparing a change with another change.
When you say, I have a clock, I have time. So the sense of time, if you really think about
it, without matter, it has no meaning at all. So now, even this context, when you say space and
time are physical entities without referring to matter at all, there is really a conceptual
problem. There is a philosophical problem. It is not rigorous enough. It is not sufficient.
So if you go really deep there, already you are stuck with these primitive concepts.
They are metaphysical concepts, actually. They are not physical. Not quite physical, I would say.
Can I pause you there for a second? When did people begin to be concerned with this? Was
this something that people realized as soon as relativity was born? Was this something that was
on the tips of people's tongues, or has this kind of really been underground this whole time?
This meaning, the reification. Yes, the lack of physical reference points.
This is already Newton's pregipia. Because Newton bonded to axiomatize,
everything which he was talking about. So he wanted to talk about space, time. Though he
started by saying that he did not want to define, because these are sort of obvious concepts,
he still tried to talk about them, define them. And then he had to, because he had to describe
movement of objects, dynamics in space and time. And then he had to say something about
what is time and what is space. So he started by defining space in the beginning of pregipia itself.
He makes these definitions. However, he immediately got stuck, because he had to define,
once he defined what he called absolute time and absolute space, without reference to anything
at all. That's what he meant by absolute. Without taking support of matter and various other concepts,
purely primitive, pristine concepts, he defined space and time, but he couldn't point to what is
space, what is what is time. So he defined them quantitatively or something. Is that what you
mean by definition? Yeah, he just defined it sort of lyrically. You can always give a definition
in terms of words. But how do you point to some object? How do you recognize what is space,
what is time? He said you cannot, because instead of the absolute space and absolute time,
in their place, we use, in practical terms, we use what is called relative space and relative time.
And relative space is when you make markers in space and define a motion with respect to those
markers. And markers are material references. Similarly, time, relative time, some change
is happening. You take that as some reference and describe another change. So he was Newton,
who realized the necessity of distinguishing between space and time as metaphysical primitives.
And also, provide ways of identifying what could be used as relative space and relative time. So
everything is eroded systematically in Pringipiya. Because he also had to talk about certain
phenomena which we see, like centrifugal force. This you discussed in an earlier podcast with
Assis, for example. So, he wanted to give, since he defined absolute space and absolute time,
he also tried to give a proof for the existence of what we call, what he called as the absolute space.
And he said, absolute space can be, the existence of reality of absolute space can be
seen in phenomena like centrifugal force. And when a mass of liquid in a bucket, if it is
rotating, the fact that its surface becomes curved, this kind of a thing happens only because
the body of water is rotating with respect to absolute space according to him.
Of course, this was criticized much later by Anas Mark, 200 years later.
And where he said, what Newton claimed has no basis. Because when you say a body of water rotates,
it could be just rotating with respect to all the matter in the universe and not with respect to
absolute space. So, it could be an interaction which causes this curvature of the surface of water,
real interaction with the rest of the matter and not something, some abstract,
unobservable entity like absolute space and so on.
Which is a small difference, right? It's a very tiny difference, but it's a really important
difference. I feel like Newton was observing this phenomenon, trying to make sense of it,
but he stopped thinking about interactions with matter. And that's where things maybe first go
off the rails a little bit. But can you address the question I put earlier that were people upset
about this when this happened? Were there philosophers that were coming out and saying,
no, this can't be? I mean, it's very platonic, the idea of absolute space and absolute time.
Yes, it's an old concept. It's a very old concept, absolute space without matter,
something which can hold. There is a book by Max Jammar on space and a preface is written by Einstein
where, again, these questions are discussed, what is space and what is time. But of course,
these are much later. But Newton, after Newton, I think there is some discussion by Bishop Berkeley
on this issue. But otherwise, serious discussion and a serious proposal,
alternative to what Newton was saying, that happened only with a smock.
So people were upset, but they didn't have an alternative. They weren't totally sure how to
interactively link it. I'm not even sure that people were upset at the time of Newton.
No, that's right. Yeah, there was nothing to be upset about it. I mean, it was acceptable.
Like it worked. It worked. And he had, he had mathematically created, I've always seen Newton
as the guy who is able to put mathematics in motion. And people are so tickled by that,
that they're like, whatever assumptions this guy had to make to do this,
fine. Because this works and now we can predict things in design.
Also, I don't think people felt very strange to think of space as something,
some entity which was there as some absolute abstracting, even without matter.
Because there's a long philosophical tradition of the void.
Yes. And the void as this concept seems very similar to absolute space. And it seems like a
logical, not a huge leap to say, well, okay, if there is void that is unchanging,
then there also must be some ticking pendulum somewhere that will never change that everything
happens on the backdrop of. For example, you look at serious physicists today.
Today, most of the physicists, practicing physicists are willing to accept the concept of
space without matter, time without matter. So I don't think, I think people get upset the other way.
If you say these things happen because of some interaction, people gets what interaction?
We have an article hanging on our wall by Lee Cronin and Sarah Walker that was in
some science magazine the other day where they argue that time is an object.
Right. And so I think that you're right, that the greatest problem has always arisen when
somebody shows up and is like, hold on, hold on, hold on, hold on, hold on. Can we like get
back to the material at hand here? Was Bergson really the first critic? You talk about Henry
Bergson a lot in your work. And was that the first outspoken critic of this misplaced concreteness?
No, Bergson comes into picture from another angle. We'll come to that. But I want to make
one more point on this, why people were not upset with absolute space. See, when you look up into
the sky, you see matter, stars, Milky Way. But if you look at the amount of matter you see
in terms of stars and one galaxy, that is really not enough to fill the whole space you can imagine.
In that sense, one always thought of largely empty space filled with a few stars and so on.
We didn't know the extent of this universe, how much matter it consisted of. All that came in
this last century. Before that, we had a solar system and a little bit of stars everywhere,
but compared to empty space, this is a very miniscule amount of matter.
I believe they thought our galaxy was the extent of the universe all the way up into the 20th,
almost the mid 20th century. That's why even when Enes Mark talked about some interaction,
interaction which could be responsible for things like phenomena like centrifugal acceleration,
he could not suggest it could be the gravity of this matter. Because once you say it is gravity,
then you can always calculate using Newton's theory how much gravity. If you calculate gravity
with only Milky Way or 102 Milky Way like galaxies, you get a very, very small amount of
gravity which is not enough to explain anything which you see. All this realization could not
have happened even if you had the idea before we knew about this universe. I think now we
can at least observe by statistical sampling something like trillions of galaxies.
Yes. Now we have a rough idea of our vast universe, how much matter is there,
and it has real serious consequences to our current theories.
You make this point in the paper that you shared with us, which is that the theories
that are foundational for physics were completed before we ever had this information.
The information wasn't even theorized. It wasn't that the theories were put together with the idea
that there was this vast universe that was filled with so much material. They were constructed in
the sense of, okay, well, we have very little material. And we stuck with those theories.
And they haven't been revised. And I think that that's the core of your argument, which is that,
okay, so we have these theories that were constructed with a limited base of knowledge.
And we have accepted them because they're mathematically very beautiful and I'm sure
that there's cultural effects in there as well. But now we have come out the other side and we
have so much more information and we have to go back and we have to reevaluate Einstein's theories
to see if the core postulates hold knowing everything that we know and everything that
we've accumulated in the times really since Newton. Yes. So right here, one can make a point
that you can come back to again and again. When you say, let's look at the concept of absolute
space of Newtons. Now, when you say absolute space, it only is talking about one space,
one entity. There is only one absolute space you will talk about.
When you say absolute time, you are talking about one universal time. Conceptually, that's
what you mean by that. There is one reference time with the relative to which all other times
are measured. There is one space, one holding space in which everything is arranged in various
locations and so on. Now, when you talk about a universe, there's only one universe. When we say
universe, it is one frame which we are talking about. Then everything else, every other motion,
every other position, every thing which is happening, evolving in time, all this will have
to be referred to this, what the dynamics of one universe. Then that universe provides
reference for dynamics. Now, there is a very intimate connection between
this kind of a concept of one absolute reference and things like the propagation of light.
If you remember, before Einstein's theory came up, we had a theory of relativity,
which was developed by Lawrence and Poincare. This theory had as its background what they
called absolute either. Absolute either was a hypothetical medium which was postulated
so that the waves of light could propagate in that medium. It is like
air for propagation of sound. So, people believed that there should be some medium for the propagation
of transverse waves because that's our experience. All transverse waves which we know, all kinds
of waves we know of, they all propagate in some medium. So, a medium was postulated even before
the theories of relativity came. There is one medium, it's an all-pervading medium which people
had in mind. And in that medium, like sound propagates in air, it has some particular velocity
decided by the properties of that medium. Now, if you are an observer who is moving
relative to that medium, you will measure a different velocity for the same light.
Light is propagating in the medium at one velocity. You move in that medium,
then relative to that observer, light will move faster or slower depending on the direction of
the movement. So, that is a common sense view. So, the old relativity of Lawrence and Poincare
had the velocity of light depending on the motion of the observer. It was not an invariant
velocity. All this was changed by Einstein's postulate of an invariant velocity of light.
He postulated that the relative velocity of light is a constant, no matter whether the observer
is moving towards an array of light or moving away from an array of light, if you measure velocity,
it's an invariant constant. So, he had a different theory of relativity, which was
different from the theory of Lawrence and Poincare. However, the mathematics
which is used to describe that theory of relativity was exactly the same, Lawrence transformations.
So, it's very interesting that at some stage in the development of physics,
let's say 1900, we had two theories of relativity. Both were acceptable theories of
relativity because both agreed with every experimental observations we had in those
days from Michelson Mollie experiment or later things. Both theories agreed empirically with
phenomena which we could see in the laboratory. However, the basic postulates which go into the
two theories were entirely different. In one theory, light travelled with a variable velocity.
However, there were new phenomena like length contraction, time dilation, so on. Those new
phenomena coupled with the propagation of light somehow explained what you can see in the laboratory.
In Einstein's theory, very similar phenomena were proposed because he was the same mathematics.
However, the way Einstein set up the observability of this phenomena,
he arranged a set even with an invariant velocity of light, he could explain the same phenomenon.
Now, sociologically, this is where some amount of sociology comes. Sociologically,
Einstein's theory was gained prominence very soon. Most of the physicists including Lawrence
sort of agreed with what Einstein said. Lawrence said what we were trying to explain
and Einstein just postulated and went ahead. So, at some stage, Einstein's theory gained
prominence and it got accepted. Though there is not even a single experiment, even today,
even today, there is not even a single experiment which can prove that the relative velocity of
light is invariant constant. Experiments are consistent with that postulate, but there is no
experiment which can prove this postulate directly. Why is that? There are subtle reasons for that.
One would imagine that if you measure the velocity of a propagating entity,
you can settle the question whether the relative velocity is a constant or variable.
It sounds simple enough. For example, if you want to measure the relative velocity of sound,
all you need is two microphones set apart by a meter or so on a frame. Then you have a source
of sound somewhere. You make the sound and measure the duration to pass between two microphones.
So, you have a duration, you have distance fixed by the two microphones. Then you
take a ratio, you get a velocity. Then you can move the whole thing and you can measure the same
velocity relative to moving reference frame. Therefore, it is very easy to decide whether the
relative velocity of sound is variable or a constant. When you do this experiment, you will
see that the relative velocity of sound does depend on the velocity of the reference frame.
This is just the Doppler effect. Doppler effect is related, but Doppler effect is
on the pitch, on the frequency of sound. Velocity is just a ratio between the
distance traveled and the duration taken for traveling the distance.
The Doppler shift happens when you have a stationary detector and then the sound sources
are moving relative to it. But the experiment that you're describing, the microphones and the sound
source are all moving together as one unit. That's an interesting question because
there is one aspect which is not very clearly explained even in textbooks.
Whether you take sound or light or even waves on water surface,
the velocity of these waves does not depend on the velocity of the source.
That is, it's entirely defined by the medium. It depends only on the properties of the medium.
And is this true for light as far as sound? I think just to make sure that we set this
absolutely clear, the Doppler thing is just that you're encountering more peaks on the wave
which is different than the actual motion of the waves. Whereas the real question in the
relativity is whether the relative velocity, whether it depends on the motion of the observer,
the reference frame, not the source. Okay, now what's interesting is in the case of...
Which would be entirely unique in the universe, right? That would be entirely unique as far as
waves propagation is concerned. I didn't understand that question.
Well, that would be a very exceptional physical phenomenon if that was true because it doesn't
seem to play out that way in any other wave systems that we're aware of.
Right. That is, if there is a medium, it's obvious that the relative velocity will depend also on
the motion of the observer. It is very clear that if there is only one frame, if there is an absolute
frame, one could identify whether it is either or something similar, then the relative velocity
will depend on the velocity of the observer. So, postulating that...
Hold on one second. I'm really sorry, but weren't we just saying that in the case of sound that
it only depends on the medium itself but not the observer?
No. It doesn't depend on the velocity motion of the source, but it does depend on the velocity
of the observer. So, if we move these two microphones towards the source or away from the source,
the duration taken to travel from one microphone to the other will depend on the velocity of the
microphone, which is obvious because the sound reaches the first microphone at some time, some
instant, then by the time sound reaches the next one, that microphone has moved away.
I see, I see. Therefore, obviously, it has to take more time, more duration.
Therefore, relative to the microphones, you have to say the velocity is less.
Relative to somebody watching this experiment, what happened was the microphone was moving away,
so it took more duration. But if you are sitting in the frame of the microphone, if you are moving
with the microphone, then it is as if the relative velocity has reduced to reach from one microphone
to other. So, when you say relative velocity, it's always a comparison between two observers,
one observer who is watching outside the frame and another observer who is sitting with the frame.
Got it. Like, we are sitting on the earth, but the earth is moving at a very, very large velocity
which we don't realize about. It's not only the velocity in its orbit around the sun,
but it's moving through the universe at about 350, 370 kilometers per second.
We don't realize that. So, the question is, if a light ray is coming from outer space
into our rooms, it touches one window at a particular instant, by the time it reaches
the next window, the room itself has moved away a long distance. Now, the question is,
even with that kind of a phenomenon, how can it happen that the relative velocity of light
be a constant? How can you postulate such a very strange conclusion?
That is why it is really a strange postulate. In fact, I have something, see, Charles Nordman,
he was a radio astronomer, he was a friend of Einstein, he was an admirer of Einstein.
He wrote something, some report on Einstein's visit to Paris in 1922, a very well written
short report on the visit, and that time he mentioned this strange postulate of the
constancy of the relative velocity of light, and he wrote it this way. There is hardly...
He said, however, there is still something infinitely troubling in the Einsteinian system.
This system is admirably coherent, but it rests on a particular conception of the propagation of
light. How are we to imagine that the propagation of a ray of light could be identical for an observer
who flies away from it, and for an observer who rushes to meet it? If this is possible,
it is in any case inconceivable to our customary mentality, and no matter how hard we try,
we cannot make the mechanism and the nature of that propagation indeligible. It must be
confessed that here lies a mystery which eludes us. The whole ancient synthesis, as coherent as it is,
rests on a mystery, exactly like revealed religions. That's what he said, and that is true.
It's a very strange concept, but once you postulate that invariance of the relative velocity,
all results of relativity theory follows from that.
Lawrence transformation, everything follows from just that single postulate. That is what Einstein did.
And people accepted it, even though it was a strange concept. People accepted it because
it gave the full theory. When Lawrence and Poincare created the theory of relativity,
it was a step-by-step progression where people had to work out each detail, because it was based on
this another strange concept called either, which we cannot see, we cannot feel, we cannot get any
evidence for it. But it was also postulated, and people thought any day Einstein's postulate is
less evil than accepting something like an ether.
Why do you think that is? I understand an unobservable, hypothetical unobservable,
this postulate of the ether is difficult to stomach, but some exceptionalism to physics,
as we understand it, seems even worse to me. There is one reason, and I think it's an important
and genuine reason. If you look at the theory of Lawrence and Poincare, it is based on
electrodynamics. Either was a medium, which was meant to support electrodynamics phenomena,
called phenomena in electrodynamics. And Lawrence was trying to derive every result of
relativity as a electromagnetic phenomena, because matter, it was already known by that time that
matter consists of atoms and probably electrons, and there are electrical forces holding matter
together. Therefore, he was trying to derive everything in relativity using electrodynamical
phenomena. In Einstein's theory, this cage of electrodynamics is broken. It's a more general
theory. Having postulated the invariance of the relative velocity of light,
then a theory follows from this postulate. That theory is supposed to be applicable to
all phenomena in physics. So, it's the temptation of the universalization,
this holy grail of physics that I can talk about everything all at once.
Yes, so therefore, you would agree that all of us would agree if we are supposed to pick one of
these theories, we would say we will prefer the more universal theory which is applicable to
mechanics, electrodynamics, optics, everything else. That is what happened. However, we should
realize that the postulate was not experimentally verified. It was unverifiable because of certain
reasons. Now, one reason I can immediately tell you, when you think of the concept of velocity,
it is a statement of the duration taken for moving from a point to another point.
So, there is a starting point, there is a final point. Now, you need two clocks,
one clock at the starting point and one clock at the finishing point to measure a duration.
So, you can fix a distance by pre-measuring that distance, you can say this is one meter.
But duration is measured with only two clocks, not with one clock. So, if you are an observer
who is at position A, first point, that observer has no access to the clock at B, position B.
At position B, there is another observer. So, there is a problem of synchronization of
two clocks. How are you to make sure that these clocks read exactly the same type?
For measuring the velocity of sound, it does not matter because velocity of sound is a small
quantity. You can always, you can synchronize clocks with a accuracy much. There are,
the point is, there are things which move faster than sound. So, those things can be used to
synchronize these two clocks. But there is nothing which moves faster than light.
Okay. So, to synchronize two clocks for measuring the velocity of light
is not only a technical problem, it's a conceptual problem. How can we synchronize
these two clocks? If you use light for synchronizing two clocks, then it becomes a circular argument.
You are trying to measure the velocity of light and you are using the same light to synchronize
two clocks. So, that is a circular argument. You cannot do that.
If you synchronize two clocks at the same position and move one of those clocks to the
second position, you need a theory of moving clocks. You have to make sure that nothing
happens to this clock while moving. But theory of relativity is also about what happens to moving
clocks. So, you see, conceptually, there is a difficulty of synchronizing two clocks.
If you want to measure the relative velocity of light. Therefore, all traditional experiments
in relativity are what are called two-way experiments. You send light, get it back
by reflecting Michelson-Morley experiment and so on. Now, when you are in a moving frame,
let's say you are in a moving vehicle, a moving train or moving earth.
And light propagates in one way. You don't know what its relative velocity is. But when
light propagates the opposite way, whatever effects which happens because the velocity
varies with the motion of the observer, that effect gets cancelled out. Because one way is
along the motion of the frame, other way it is opposite the motion of the frame. So,
this cancellation happens to a large extent. Because of which you cannot determine whether
propagation of light is with a variable velocity or with a constant velocity
with any of these two-way experiments. It would be the same thing if we did our
microphone experiment and we reflected that sound source in the moving reference frame.
There is a, yeah, it's almost same. But there is a subtle difference. There is a subtle difference.
So, when I say in the two-way propagation, it cancels out. It does not cancel out
endarily. There is a small second-order reference, something which depends on the
score of the velocity. That is in one-way propagation. If you could measure, for example,
when you do this experiment with sound, you will see that with microphones, as you move the microphone,
the velocity, relative velocity changes and that change is proportional to the velocity of the
observer. In a two-way experiment, that proportionality, that's not any more
surveyed. It cancels out. But there is a residual effect which depends on the score
of the velocity, next order, which is a much smaller quantity. What I mean is,
when I say first order, it's a ratio between the velocity of the observer and the velocity of the
light or sound. For example, velocity of sound is 300 meter per second, let's say, 300 meter.
And the microphones are moving at one meter per second. So, one by 300 is the velocity of the
observer divided by the velocity of sound, one by 300. That's a kind of signal you can get in an
experiment when you do this experiment in a laboratory, the relative strength of the
signal. So, if the microphones are moving by one meter per second, you get one by 300.
If it moves by two meters per second, you get two by 300 and so on. Proportionately.
However, in a two-way experiment, if you reflect sound like a Michelson-Mowley experiment,
you get V square by C square, second order. So, one by 300 square, which is much less,
which is one by 10 to the power of 5, much smaller. But there is a signal. You can measure that.
In fact, that is what Michelson and Mowley were trying to measure, the second order signal,
something which depends on the square of the V by C ratio, which is a very, very small signal,
because Michelson and Mowley were not trying to measure the relative velocity of sound.
They were trying to measure the motion of the air relative to the absolute either.
They were trying to detect the motion of the air relative to absolute either. So, for that
detection, they realized if light goes and comes back, you still have a small signal
in which there is a signature of the velocity of the air through the either. Though it is a small
signal, you can measure it. That's what Michelson attempted.
Can I ask you just from a conceptual standpoint to help me understand why there's a residual
in a two-way experiment versus a one-way? What is the cause of that? Having trouble understanding
why that even happens? Not necessarily the math bit, but why is that?
That's the reason. Yeah, I can just sort of try to say it and you can try to imagine whatever.
Yeah, let's see what we can do. So, the time taken. So, I have a pulse of light which goes from point
A to point B. Now, the separation between point A and point B, let's say call it L,
distance of 1 meter or L meters. Okay, or let's fix it at 1 meter, 1 meter.
Now, the time taken, duration to pass this 1 meter is even by 1 meter divided by the velocity.
Length divided by velocity is a duration. Now, suppose the relative velocity
depends on the velocity of the observer. So, if you are chasing, if the observer is moving in
the same direction as a light propagation, the relative velocity will be less c minus v.
So, in one direction, c minus v is a relative velocity.
In the opposite direction, it is c plus v. So, duration taken in one direction is 1 meter divided by
c minus v. Duration taken in the other way, it is 1 divided by c plus v.
Okay. Now, total duration is 1 divided by c minus v plus 1 divided by c plus v.
So, this because of c plus v and c minus v happens in the denominator and not in the
numerator, they don't cancel out completely. What you get is
1 minus v square by c square after that factor will come. In fact, this factor is very important
in the relativity. 1 minus v square by c square. I guess for me, I think that conceptually it means
that since this whole package is moving, it never really fully catches up to itself. There's some
loss to this motion when you're moving with it. It seems like there's just a loss.
Yeah, I'm not sure how I can better conceptualize it. I mean, I think that ultimately the mathematics
helps conceptualize it because you have this relationship where when you're moving, the
speed has to take into account your motion in the same direction. And so, that's c minus v.
And then when it's bouncing back in the other direction, it also has to take into account
your motion, which is c plus v. And when you mathematically try to combine those two fractions,
you end up with this square second order. So, the point is, it is a fraction. That is, if it was,
if the c plus v and c minus v, if they're in the numerator, when you add up, the v will cancel out
completely. But here we are talking about durations, duration for the propagation. So, it is length
divided by the velocity. So, c plus v and c minus v are in the denominator, not at the numerator.
Therefore, when you add these two things together, there's a small residual. It depends on v square
by c square. And that is, in fact, that was the logic what Michelson used to design his experiment.
He said, it is difficult to measure the one-way propagation, but the two-way propagation is
easy to measure because I can bring back the light to the location where I am.
And though the signal is very small, I have this very nice technique of
interferometry. He invented fine interferometry. I will use interference of light to measure this.
And he set up the experiment. That's how, but what happened in the experiment?
He did not see any signal, though he had the sensitivity to see the v square by c square signal.
See, if you look at the numbers here, the velocity v is the velocity of the earth
through either. And they assume that that velocity is the same as the velocity of the earth in the
orbit around the sun. This is 30 kilometers per second. The velocity of light is 300,000
kilometers per second. So, ratio v by c is one part in 10 to the 4, one part in 10,000.
Square of that is 10 part in billion. So, it was a small signal, but still it's a signal which
has a signature of that velocity. If the velocity is changing,
that one will be able to measure it using Michelson's interferometric techniques.
Can I ask you a question about interferometers before we move on, which is,
aren't we looking at some sort of phase shift of the wave in interferometers?
And we're back calculating the velocity change as a result. Is that a more like a Doppler type
situation though? It is not Doppler because the source, the interferometer, the observer,
everybody is sitting on the same frame in the laboratory. Doppler effects will happen only
when there is a relative motion between the source and the detector. Got it, got it. So,
it's like in our case where the microphones are moving together essentially. Yeah, everything is
moving together. But so, when Michelson did, so in the interference, it is measuring the
duration. So, since light is supposed to be a wave, if the duration taken for one way propagation
and then the reverse propagation, the total duration is what Michelson was trying to measure here.
If the total duration depends on the velocity of the earth through the ether, if that velocity
changes, increases or decreases, then the number of oscillations of light
in a particular distance also will change. Because when you say a phase of a wave
phase, how many oscillations of a wave, it depends, it is just a frequency of that wave,
which is a fixed quantity multiplied by duration. So, duration, interference technique can be used
to measure durations very accurately. That was a basic idea. And here we are trying to measure
a duration. Duration for light to go to a distance and come back to the same position. What is a
duration? Does this duration depend on the velocity of the earth when it goes around the sun?
And they found that they were not able to measure the variations in this duration,
even though the interferometer could be rotated in space. So, the relative velocity is changing.
They know that they could change the relative velocity conceptually. However, the signal
did not show any of this. So, they could not detect the presence of ether. They could not
detect the motion of the earth through the ether. And by ether, we are thinking of this static
backdrop type ether, right? That is not really connected necessarily. It does not move around
with things. It is just there. Nothing. In fact, it has the property that it is not movable
stationary. They called it stationary either. That word was stationary was the word which is used
to describe it. So, the concept was there is a absolute, all-pervading medium, which is
absolutely still and earth and everything else is moving through that. But they could not detect it
and they had to explain why they could not detect it. And Lawrence invented this phenomenon called
length contraction. He said, okay, light is propagating with a variable velocity, duration is
actually changing, but I cannot see it because interferometer itself,
when it moves through the ether, its length reduces a little bit.
And that reduction in length also is, involves this ratio 1 minus V square by C square.
So, the two can cancel out. Okay, it is more subtle than this. It is actually square root
of 1 minus V square by C square for length contraction. There is a similar effect on time
dilation. Again, another one square root. So, this two square root of 1 minus V square by C square
multiplied together gives 1 minus V square by C square. So, Lawrence could explain everything.
So, he said light is propagating in the same way with a variable velocity, but there are new
phenomena, length contraction and time dilation. So, all the three together conspire to keep this
medium called ether invisible. That was Lawrence's theory. Einstein said, okay, this is all
superfluous, extraneous things. We don't need all this either. All we need is single postulate.
Postulate that the relative velocity of light does not depend on the velocity of the observer.
So, if they had designed the Michelson-Morley experiment,
not to measure relative to the ether, but to move the detector as the experiment
is run, would they have got?
You mean the source or something?
Well, the source and the detect... So, assuming that the... So, you have, let's say, an interferometer
path, which you have point A and point B. And the light is emitted at point A, but then the
detector begins to move from point A towards point B, and it's reflected at point B and comes
back to the detector. Would they have gotten a different result? Would they have been able to
see this change? No. Earlier, I said, all this does not depend on the velocity of the source.
Velocity of the source is irrelevant. But if the source and the detector are the same?
If the source and the... Well, because imagine that there's a single postulate,
like a single photon gets put into the system. So, let's say even the source and the detector
aren't the same thing, but they start at the same place.
Yeah. The result will be exactly the same. What Michelson and Morley got, this result
is sort of a universal result. That will not change by changing the kind of source or any
of the configurational changes. It will not... The point is the explanation that light is
propagating with a variable velocity, but there are these new phenomena, physical phenomena,
light and contraction and time relation that works in all circumstances.
You cannot say that this explanation is incorrect for any experiment. The only thing is you cannot
distinguish this explanation from Einstein's explanation that... No, that is not the reason.
The relative velocity of light is an invariant. So, these are two different explanations.
You cannot distinguish with an... Two-way experiment, you cannot determine which explanation is right.
So, you need a one-way experiment. But one-way experiment,
there are conceptual problems because you don't know how to synchronize these two clocks.
So, one had to invent a method. One had to invent a method where the synchronization
problem had to be solved, somehow solve it. You have... The clocks had to be separated in space
because light has to travel some distance.
But somehow, you have to synchronize clocks at A and clock at B. And what I could do,
you know, there are some people who attempted this in the history of physics.
But all those attempts were using what is called a circular rotating experiment.
This is the Sannyak experiment.
Yes. So, when George Sannak did this experiment in 1930, it is specifically to show that,
in fact, they either exist or some absolute frame exists.
So, he had point A. Light starts propagating from point A, but it comes back to point A.
So, point A and point B are identified.
So, light has to travel from a distance to get from point A to point B.
But it is a looped path. That was his logic. In that experiment, he argued...
So, by the time light goes and comes back here, the point B moves a little bit.
Just like in a linear system, when light starts from point A to reach point B,
by the time it reaches point B, the point B has moved a little bit.
Therefore, the relative velocity or the duration is different.
Here, rotating apparatus, when the light goes in this loop path,
the point B has moved. But now, there is no burden of synchronizing point A and point B,
because they are together. It is as if one is using the same clock at A and B.
But then, the result was, in some sense, shocking, because it showed that indeed,
the relative velocity of light depends on the velocity of the observing frame,
reference frame. However, by 1913, Einstein's theory had been already accepted by most of the
physics community. Though, there were some objections. Still, some people were not very
convinced. But there were very powerful, prominent physicists of that type, Max Planck,
Lawrence, and people like that. They had accepted Einstein's theory as the most plausible theory
of relativity. Nobody questioned, when Sannak's experiment results came, people tried to evade
it instead of discussing it. That's what happened in history. In fact,
I was going to say, what was the readout of Sannyak's experiment? Was it a phase shift of the light?
Yes, it's exactly the same. In fact, whatever Michelson was trying to measure,
he said, every time you do a interferometry experiment,
a measurement with an interferometer, a duration, a change in duration is measured as a phase shift
and the phase shift is measured as a shift of the fringes, which you see, but this pattern of,
periodic pattern of fringes, bright and dark patterns. So, it shifts a little bit and that
is interpreted as a change in the duration of propagation and that is how it is measured.
And Sannak's experiment also, that is what is measured. But Sannak experiment, if you look at,
it's a one-way experiment that propagates in the same direction throughout
because the synchronization problem is not there anymore.
Therefore, the signal is proportional to V, V by C, not V square by C square.
So, it's a much easier experiment to do because signal is very large compared to
Michelson-Mowley experiment. So, what happened in the history was,
Sannak's experiment was not, it didn't get them attention, which it deserved.
But there is something very strange here in the history. The same idea, whatever Sannak had as
an idea. Michelson had the same idea in about 1904 and he wrote a paper even before Einstein's theory
came up, that was in 1905, Einstein's theory. Michelson wrote a paper in 1904 saying the
following. Okay, in the earlier experiment, where the two-way propagation of light was studied,
the presence of the hypothetical ether was not found in the experiment. However,
if a different kind of experiment is done, in which light travels only in one direction
and comes back to the starting point, in that kind of an interferometer, I can measure,
I propose to measure the presence of ether. So, he wanted to do an experiment in the same,
almost the same design as the Sannak experiment. But Michelson's interest was in detecting the
motion of the earth relative to ether. So, what he said was, he could not detect the linear motion
of the earth through the ether, but he can measure the rotational motion, the spinning motion of the
earth in the ether using a different design of an interferometer. But the kind of interferometer
he had in mind had to be very large to measure the rotation of the earth.
See, when Sannak did his experiment, he did it in a rotating frame in the laboratory.
It was a tabletop experiment where the frame was rotated manually on a table.
Michelson's interest was in detecting the rotation of the earth itself relative to ether.
And since the earth rotation is at a very small rate, it takes 24 hours for one full rotation.
The interferometer had to be very large in size to detect it. But he did this experiment in 1925.
It is called Michelson's Gale experiment. He did it with a person called Gale.
It was published in Astrophysical Journal in two papers.
One paper was about the experiment. It was a kilometer size interferometer,
much like today's gravitational wave detectors and so on.
And another paper was about the theory of this experiment in which he stated
that he detected the rotational motion of the earth relative to ether.
In 1925, he wrote that paper. So even in 1925, Michelson was a believer in stationary ether.
He was a believer. He had repeatedly said that also. He sort of leaned towards
the concept of ether. So he was convinced that there is an absolute frame.
However, as I said, Einstein's theory was so prominent by that time, especially after 1919,
after the eclipse, solar eclipse, the general theory of relativity, all that came together.
The Einstein's theory was unshakable. The faith in Einstein's theory was unshakable,
which continues to this day.
But however, it's a fact that all these experiments are there in history.
These are results which are there, which will not go away. And people said,
so the objection to Sannak experiment was that, okay, it's a rotating frame,
rotating reference frame, which is not equal to a linearly moving reference frame.
There is a, in physics, there is a distinction made between what is called inertial motion
and non-inertial motion. Inertial motion is when you move linearly on a straight line
at a constant velocity, inertial motion. Inertial motion, you cannot distinguish,
you cannot recognize, you cannot distinguish inertial motion from a state of rest.
For example, we would say we are in inertial motion with the Earth now. We don't know
Earth is moving at hundreds of kilometers per second because we are almost in inertial motion.
So, inertial motion cannot be distinguished from a state of rest. It is called principle of
relativity. What is called principle of relativity is just this statement that you cannot distinguish
inertial motion at any velocity from just a state of rest. It was stated by Galileo.
And that's a fundamental principle of physics. So, people try to distinguish between inertial
motion and this non-inertial set of motion where there is rotation, acceleration, etc.
And there's a misconception even among physicists that Einstein's theory of relativity,
special relativity is not applicable to situations of non-inertial motion.
Anyway, that kind of an objection was raised about Sannak experiment.
Therefore, it was that Sannak's works went into oblivion. People ignored it.
However, this is the point I make in my papers and so on. I solved this problem.
What I wanted was, I had to solve a dual problem. One is the synchronization of clocks,
which people like Michelson and Sannak had already solved by looping around.
Now, I also had to solve this problem of inertial motion versus non-inertial motion.
I needed an experiment where the reference frame is moving inertially
and the clocks are synchronized automatically. So, I found a configuration, which is not a
rotating configuration. It's a stadium kind of a loop path. It's a different kind of configuration
where the reference frame, the clocks, the detector, the emitter, everything is moving
linearly, but the light goes around in a loop path and comes back. And I could do
this kind of an experiment in the laboratory and the results show that the relative velocity is
exactly like the relative velocity of sound. It depends on the motion of the observer.
It's a variable quantity.
All right. So, I think that we should unpack the material solutions to this problem or perhaps
start to consider Ernst Mach's ideas. Do you want to take a very short break just to stretch
really quick before we tackle that issue? Let's do that. I think it's always good to think about
this for a minute and then come back to it. Okay. During the break, I took a moment to read
the Michelson paper from 1925, the one that he did with Gail. Oops, I can't hear you for a reason.
Oh, there we go. So, you make the case that Sonja does this experiment. There's reasons to dismiss
it because of the design, but it seems like it would be difficult to also dismiss Michelson's
experiment. Yes, right. And Michelson was a more permanent figure. He was a leader. He was a noble
laureate. But see, 1925, as I said, by then the theory Einstein's theory was very well accepted.
There were very few critics. There were critics always, but there were so few that I think
the Michelson-Gail experiment was, it went unnoticed. That's what I think. But it's difficult to
gauge. When I give talks on relativity and various things, I see that nobody has heard about
the Michelson-Gail experiment except some senior people from a different generation.
So, it's not very clear to me why it is so, but because it's very clear what Michelson says
in that abstract is very clear. Referring to his 1904 paper, he says that
if the ether is there, this is the kind of signal which is expected. And in 1925 writes
that the expected signal is measured. It is seen in the experiment. It is very clear.
But he was also very careful. He says that this is consistent with Einstein's
formulation. In a way, it is actually very subtle. And to explain, it will take some
effort. But the point is, even today, you see, Sainac's discovery was very important in terms of
practical application. It's a Sainac interferometer which is used today to measure
what's called a gyroscope to measure rotations in aeroplanes and so on. If you are in an
aircraft, if you want to measure how its direction is changing, you need a gyroscope.
What is used today is a laser-based gyroscope, active laser gyroscope,
or a fiber laser gyroscope. All this based on Sainac's idea that if you are in a rotating
situation, light takes more time to travel the distance and that can be measured.
And that is a measure of rotation. So everywhere Sainac gyro is very important in practical
applications. However, nobody realizes that this was originally proposed as evidence for
the existence of the ether. Okay. But Microsoft experiment is, since it was looking at the rotation
of the Earth, it is not that well known as the Sainac experiment.
Let's talk a little bit about how we could interpret all of this data in a slightly
different light by considering the fact that there's an invalid assumption about empty space
spaked into all of this and that if we start to consider that the universe is filled with
matter that's all exerting gravity upon one another, we can reframe some of these results.
Yes. Yes, we should get to that. But before that, I thought there's one more point
related to what you asked earlier, where Henry Buxton comes into picture.
See, that is a question of what is called the concept of simultaneity.
When do we say two events are simultaneous? Of course, if two events happen at our own
location, we are sitting in some location in space. If some two events occur in the same
location, we don't have any ambiguity about whether they are simultaneous or not simultaneous.
But if these two events happen at a distance from us at two different points,
then some signal has to bring in this information about these events to us.
How do we decide whether these two events are simultaneous or not?
It's an important problem in physics, it's an important problem in general life and it's an
important problem of philosophy as well. So Buxton was an expert on issues related to time,
duration, simultaneity and he had certain philosophical views on it, maybe prejudices or views
along the direction of thinking about absolute time, absolute simultaneity and so on.
And it is in this context, in the early 1900s, philosophers came into contact with the
relativity theories, in which all these concepts were thrown away,
concept of simultaneity, concept of clocks, time, because the rate of clocks,
since it depended on the motion of the clocks, moving clock went slow, moving clock was
running slower, time dilation. So for every observer, there was his own type,
multitude of times. This was not really palatable to philosophers at that time,
because philosophers thought there is one universal time, there's one universal concept of
simultaneity. So people like Buxton got very interested in studying relativity theory and
they did study it very carefully. It is in this context, if you look at Einstein's writing,
both his paper in 1905 and he wrote a popular book in 1960, it's called Relativity,
Suspicion and General Theory. It's almost written for a popular, common man,
that kind of a very, it starts from very basic concepts about time, space, clocks,
coordinate systems and so on. Now there is a long discussion about simultaneity in this book,
which is described in the context of a moving train, there's a platform. So one is talking
about the relativity between the person on the platform and the person in the moving train.
So in 1922 when Einstein visited Paris, there was one session, discussion,
session of discussions arranged by the Philosophical Society out there. This was a
session in Sorbonne and Buxton happened to be there. Buxton was a very prominent,
most popular philosopher at that time. His lectures were very popular in Paris
and in that session he was just one of the persons who came to listen to what Einstein had to say.
At some stage there were some discussions, very short discussions and in which Buxton
was asked to comment on Einstein's theory because people knew that Buxton had studied this series.
And Buxton said in this short time he has studied it, he studied it for his own benefit
and it's a very interesting theory. But in the short discussion he cannot express all that he
thinks about this theory. However, he wanted to point out something about this concept of
simultaneity in Einstein's theory and he made short comments for a few minutes in which he said
there is, he indicated, he didn't explain it but he indicated there is some real problem,
the way Einstein deals with simultaneity in relativity theory. Einstein did not take it very
seriously. However, in the same year, Buxton wrote a book which is called duration and
simultaneity, written in France, published in 1922, in which he explains with extreme clarity
where Einstein had gone wrong, real wrong in dealing with simultaneity in relativity.
Okay, so I didn't want to explain the whole writing here but it's, if Einstein had paid
attention to what Buxton had to say in that book, he, Einstein himself would have been able
to correct his theory because what he talks about simultaneity in his theory is actually a blunder,
blunder in the sense that once you assume that the velocity, relative velocity of light
is the same for everybody. Suppose we say, relative velocity of light is invariant
and the same for everybody, then the concept of simultaneity which follows from that postulate
is in direct conflict with our experience, what we experience as simultaneity.
Not as a common, I'm not talking about mathematical,
mathematical subtleties of relativity, we can experience directly in real life certain examples
of simultaneity and we know what the result is. The concept of the postulate of the
invariant velocity of light is inconsistent with our experience of simultaneity. This was pointed
out. What are the examples that Buxton uses of simultaneity that is experienced? So he analyzes
the same example what Einstein describes in his book of the strain and the platform.
So the experiment, the example with Einstein uses is very, very simple. He says there's a train
moving along a platform. The platform has n points A and B. Train has n points A prime and B prime.
Now let's assume that when the train reaches the platform, these points coincide,
a point on the platform coinciding with a point on the train and the second point on
the platform coinciding with the second point on the train. Let's assume that there is an observer
on the platform, there's an observer on the train at the midpoints, midpoint of platform,
midpoint of the train and they are coinciding at some point of time. They are in line with each
other. Let's assume that at that time two strokes of lighting happened at the two ends of the train.
Somehow, so on end A and end B, two strokes of lighting has happened. Light from these
strokes of lightning will reach both observers. Now since the person on the platform is at the
midpoint, if he gets these light flashes from these two strokes of lighting at the same time
in his clock, he will say the lighting happened simultaneously at the two points
because he is at the midpoint. Now the question Einstein asks is,
for the observer in the train, are the two strokes simultaneous or not?
He is moving, he is moving relative to what at the at this particular point when the strokes
happened that two observers coincided. And then there is analysis of what would the person
inside the train conclude about simultaneity. That's the only question which is answered
by both Einstein and Berkson. And the correct experience if you think about it,
the person in the train will not see it simultaneously because he is moving away.
By the time the lightings come from both sides, he would have moved away from the midpoint.
Therefore, he cannot see these two strokes of lighting simultaneously. That's our experience
also. However, if the relative velocity is same for the observer on the platform
and the observer on the train, suppose it is same, then their experience also has to be
exactly same. When you analyze this, suppose a person on the platform sees this,
how will we, how will he argue, he is on the midpoint, light from the left side,
left side and the light from the right side are coming at the same relative velocity of velocity.
So therefore, since I am in the midpoint, they will reach at the same time. So therefore,
it's all simultaneous. Now the person in the train, how will he argue? He will say,
when I was in the midpoint, the lighting happened. But the velocity of light does not depend on the
velocity of the source. Okay. The relative, if the relative velocity of light from the left side
and from the right side are exactly the same for the person on the train as well,
then both pulses have to reach him also at the same time. There is no escape from that conclusion.
So experience contradicts the postulate very clearly. However, Einstein in his book, as well
as in his paper, when he argues about simultaneity, he forgets the fact that he has already assumed
that the relative velocity of light is invariant constant. He ignores that he makes a blunder
really. And this blunder, Berkson points out very clearly in his book as one paragraph, one paragraph.
But nobody took Berkson seriously at that time. It's a real blunder. Now there is a direct
consequence of all this. You know, GPS, GPS, all this only information, where GPS works,
the only information which comes from these satellites to our receiver in our mobile phone and so
are timing signals. The time at a satellite at about 20,000 kilometers away,
the timing signal comes saying that my position is this and I am sending the signal,
this is the time in this atomic clock. And similar timing signals are coming from multiple
satellites. To localize somebody in position, in space, you need to convert these timing signals
to distances. So there is a time of emission of the signal. There is a time of the arrival
of the signal in the receiver. The difference is the duration. This duration has to be converted to
a distance. Now we know that the relative velocity does not depend on the velocity of the source.
So the fact that the satellites are moving doesn't matter. It will only contribute to some
Doppler shift, Doppler shift in the frequency of signal, but not in the type because relative
velocity does not depend on the velocity of the source. Now the question is, in Einstein's theory,
the relative velocity does not depend on the velocity of the observer also, the receiver
as well. Therefore, the distance conversion from duration to this duration to distance
is a simple formula, invariant velocity multiplied by the duration. Distance is
just invariant constant velocity C multiplied by the duration. So when we have three such
durations, we can localize a person, a receiver. Okay. So it's a question of something like
simultaneity from three different satellites, which is a point where things are simultaneously
localized. However, suppose this concept of Einstein's concept of postulate of invariant
velocity is conflict with the concept of simultaneity. Then Einstein's formula cannot be used in
actual practice of GPS operation. You need to use the formula which is used in a Galilean theory,
like a velocity of relative velocity of sound. Because if the receiver is moving away from the
satellite, you have to say C minus V. If the receiver is moving towards a satellite,
you have to say C plus V and so on. Now it turns out the actual formula, the formula which is
actually used in GPS. If you can ask any expert in GPS, you will say it is not Einstein's formula.
It is not C times duration to calculate the distance. It is C minus V times the duration.
Okay. But that's a detail. What I'm saying is what Berkson said in 1922.
It has its resonance echoing today in GPS operation. And all this has to do with the fact that the
relative velocity is not an invariant concept. The GPS example is an elegant proof of the way that
a mathematical theory is perhaps elegant and beloved, but in practice is not used. And I think
that that's the core of the argument here, which is that there are inconsistencies with the way that
we mathematically apply these rules to reality, which is that we like the ideas behind relativity,
but when push comes to shove and we have to design a system, we use different mathematics. And those
mathematics seem to imply that the velocity is not constant, that the motion is affecting the
perceived velocity. Well, not the mathematics. What I mean is experience. Experience is what
contradicts the postulate, the basic postulate of a special theory of relativity. See, if you
look at Einstein's theory of relativity, that's the basis of all physics today.
So one cannot say that everything what is said in the theory is incorrect, because most of the
things I had to be working in practice to say that the theory was successful, which is a fact,
for example, various particle physics experiments and so on. See, if you really look at the theories
of relativity, there are two vital physical effects which you actually see in phenomena.
One is the fact that moving clocks runs slowly, time dilation. In fact, that's the most important
physical effects coming from theory of relativity. But this is a common effect. This effect is there
in both, both kind of theories. It was there in the Lawrence's theory with either, it's there in
Einstein's theory without either. So there are several physical effects which are described
correctly in both theories and they are all seen in actual empirical situations.
But really crucial, when you test a theory in physics especially, there is a concept of what's
called a crucial experiment. Even one experiment, even one experiment going against a theory
will invalidate the theory. You don't have to test a whole lot of things. Even if 99 experiments
are favouring the theory, if one experiment goes against a theory, then the whole theory can get
replaced. In fact, there is a particular quotation from Einstein which I would like to read out
which may be interesting. He says, the theoretical scientific researcher is not to be envied
because nature or more precisely put experiment is a merciless and not very kindly judge of his
efforts. She never says yes to a theory. In the best case, merely perhaps. But in most cases simply
no. If an experiment agrees with a theory, it means perhaps. If it does not agree, then it means no.
If every theory is sure to experience, it's no someday. Most theories already do so soon after
their formulation. So this crucial experiment, that is a critical element here. Even one
experiment going against a theory invalidates a theory. Here we have many examples of experience
where the postulate seems to go against experience. Therefore, there must be an alternate theory
where these things are consistent. That is what we should discuss. What is that consistent theory
which will explain everything which we know in a empirical situation
and also consistent with the fact that light can propagate with a variable velocity?
Yeah, I assume that this leads us neatly to Mach and the involvement of the rest of the universe.
Yes, that's right. Now, one point.
Can I say one thing though? I love that Einstein quote. I haven't heard that one before. But one
thing I love about it is that Einstein captures the essence of science, which is that it whittles
down possibilities. Nature never says yes to your theory. It can only say eh, maybe.
And people get so married to their theories because they think their yes is.
And I just love the humility in that Einstein quote of just recognizing that these theories
all get chopped down and replaced eventually because new data becomes available, new ways
of looking at things appear in people's imaginations. I just think that's underlining
the possibility nature of theories. We permit these ideas into the sphere of possibility
when they become theories, especially when they're widely accepted theories.
They pass lots of different tests, but that doesn't mean that they are necessarily so.
It just means they haven't been proven to be not so. That's really, really remarkable.
He wrote it in 1912 in a paper which he wrote about superconductivity. Superconductivity was
discovered in 1911. In 1912, he wrote a theoretical paper. And I think he was aware that he could
be wrong about what you were saying. That is where he has his quotation. Of course,
looking at edging from Einstein's personality, I wonder he ever thought his theory of
relativity would be subject to the same fate someday. I would assume so from the tone of
that statement. I do like that about him a lot. All right, so let's talk about Mark. Let's talk
about the cause of these discrepancies and what you think the solution said.
Before we get there, I've been rolling this thing around in my head about the Michelson-Gale
experiment. Is it possible to do this experiment on a larger scale with experimental apparatuses
that are already in place? You look at the Michelson-Gale paper and they spent a ton of money.
They had an army engineer who helped them design this massive kilometer-long path. Is there some
place where this experiment could be repeated in the modern day without having to invest?
Yeah, I know. It is always investment. If it costs at that time, it will cost much more today.
However, you see the Michelson-Gale experiment. The interferometer was already a size of a
kilometer size interferometer. There was some mild vacuum and so on based on whatever technology
was available then. But today, the gravitational wave detectors are also Michelson interferometers,
standard Michelson interferometers. Now, the next generation gravitational detectors,
which are supposed to come up after about 10 years, they are sort of triangular configuration.
In some sense, one can get similar data similar to what Michelson and Gale got in their
rectangular interferometers in this closed triangular
detectors of next generation. So it is not very difficult to do this kind of experiment
with today's technology. You don't even need one kilometer size with today's technology because
when Michelson did these experiments, there was no laser. Laser was discovered after 1960.
Michelson was doing all these experiments using discharge lamps and things like that.
Very, very small amount of light. But today, the same experiments can be done with much more
sensitivity on even a smaller scale with good vacuuming. So doing the experiment is not a problem.
What is the problem? The problem is in convincing people that here there is something
to be explained. And it's very difficult to convince people that there is a deviation
which doesn't agree with Einstein's postulate. But doesn't the GPS make it apparent?
Well, they just discounted based on the non-inertial business that we talked about.
Yeah, most of the time, that's what they do. Even there, there is an issue.
See, GPS was a technology which was implemented not by physics people. It was implemented by
defense people, okay, military and all that. So there were physicists and engineers working in that,
but mostly engineers, the physics people who are working in that tried to use and they knew about
the effects of relativity. And when the first two satellites which were sent up in the GPS
constellation, of course, now there are many, many such constellations. But when the first satellites
went up, they assumed that Einstein's formulae, formulae based on Einstein's special theory of
relativity would be sufficient, apart from the gravitational effects of one-two clocks and so
on. But soon they realized that those formulae did not work. So there were post facto corrections
introduced in the GPS algorithms. And one of them is this correction for using,
correction using C minus V and C plus V instead of C. Instead of using a constant velocity,
you use a variable velocity. But the justification given by GPS physicist's
name is Neil Ashby. He writes a lot on this Neil Ashby. The main logical basis he talks about
is about this non-inertial motion and things like that. Same objections which was raised again
about SANAX experiments. People now write about GPS assessment. But they are not
sufficient, I would say. I will give you one example, which is a very interesting example.
Suppose you see a flock of birds flying backwards carrying a clock. So there's a flock of birds,
they carry a clock, but they're flying backwards. You of course immediately know,
any commonsense person will know that birds cannot fly backwards with flapping their wings.
The only way this can happen is when we, our observer himself, is moving faster than the birds
in the same direction. We have the illusion that the birds are flying backwards.
Now you ask the question, where the clocks carried by these birds, will it go faster and slow or
slower? Will it have a time dilation? Einstein's theory says yes, because the clock is moving
relatively, the clock is moving relatively, therefore it should go slower. But I know
from common sense that I must be moving faster than the birds. That is why birds are flying
backwards. Therefore the clock carried by me should be going slower. Okay. It is just a
common sense objection. It is not an evidence against Einstein's theory. I'm not presenting it
as an evidence. I already see common sense of even an uneducated man can conflict with the
best theories of physics. And one should take this common sense conflicts very seriously
and think about it. Sometimes it may be irrelevant, but sometimes it can be very relevant.
Okay. Now we can get back to Mark. What's actually going on in your opinion?
What's actually? What's the hidden story here? There's these problems,
there's some contradictions. What does the solution set look like?
Yes. Now we come back to this issue of cosmology. We know very well that these theories were
formulated, perfected and so on. Before we knew about the extent of the cosmos, the amount of
matter in the cosmos and so on. So after 1930, after Edwin Hubble's observation that there are
a lot of extragalactic objects which seems to be going away from us at velocity proportional to
their distance, people started looking at the galaxies outside far away using the new generation
of large telescopes, one meter telescope, Palomar and various other places. Then slowly
we realized that the universe was at least a thousand times larger than what we thought it is.
Okay. We knew this Milky Way and a few Nebulae around this Magellanic clouds and so on.
But with these new telescopes, we realized that the universe is at least thousand times larger.
If it is thousand times larger, of course, the volume is a billion times larger, cube of this
thousand. So if the volume is billion times larger, we also expect the matter in this universe,
also a billion times larger than what we thought it was.
All that is fine. But now, if there is so much matter, there has to be corresponding amount of
gravity. And gravity is a very special interaction because it can affect logs, it can affect propagation
of objects, it can affect all dynamics. Even Einstein's theory itself, the general theory of
relativity, which is a theory of gravity, also says these things. We already know from experiments
that if you have two clocks at two different gravitational potentials, one at a lower potential,
another at a higher distance, a different potential, these two clocks will run at different rates,
depending on the value of the potential at the location of the clocks. So there is gravitational
time dilation. And there is a difference in gravitational potential, it can affect the rate
at which the clock runs. However, such effects are not included in the present theories, in the sense
with this enormous gravity in this universe, with this enormous gravitational potentials,
if there is any effect on clocks and propagation of light and so on, those effects are not part
of our current theories because in the current theories, the matter in the universe is not
even considered. So there is a very big missing factor. Of course, we don't know a priori that
this gravity has a significant effect or not, that we have to calculate. But the fact that gravity
affects everything means we need to reconsider our theories that because we have this new information
about the universe and if the gravity has any importance, if its magnitude is sufficient to
affect phenomena in the laboratory, we have to reconsider these theories and calculate all
these effects and see whether this is significant to change the theories or not. That's a basic
premise. Now this calculation can be done and some very interesting facts come out when you do a
even a rough calculation. See today, cosmology has developed to a stage where we have a
reasonably good idea about the average density of matter and energy in the universe.
Okay. So we have direct observation of galaxies and various sources which emit light,
but that is not all the matter. There is what is called dark matter, for example. They are
indirectly measured using their gravitational effects. So we have some measurements of this
average density of the universe. There is some uncertainty, both conceptual and quantitative
uncertainty in all these measurements. But if you have a reasonable idea, how much
matter is there, how much energy is there and so on in the universe today.
If you use these observational values and calculate the total gravitational potential
in our rooms, for example, in your room or in the room I am sitting, the same value because the
universe has the same kind of appearance relative to our small earth. The number which comes out
is a very interesting number. The total gravitational potential due to all the matter in the universe,
all the matter and energy in the universe, if you calculate, you get a number which is numerically
very close to the square of the velocity of light. That velocity of light is 300,000
kilometer per second. Take the square of that. That is a number. That number matches
the value of the total gravitational potential of all the matter and energy in the universe.
So, this is not a coincidence. There is something profound
in the fact that these two numbers match.
First suggestion is the propagation of light is controlled by the gravity of the matter in the
universe. That is why there is a relation between the velocity of light and the gravitational potential
of all the matter and energy in the universe. The cosmic gravity, its value
is equal to the square of the velocity of light. Okay. So, not only that it is enormous,
enormous gravity, it is also this particular value rate optimal. This can be calculated.
This fact was known for a long time. People did not connect it up with anything else,
but this fact was known for a long time. It is not a new fact. That is one thing.
Now, referring back to Mark's principle. See, why did what Mark said was very profound? Everybody
agrees that what Mark said and what is called Mark's principle today, it was named Mark's principle
by Einstein himself. Even Einstein said is a very profound principle. But you all know that
Mark's principle is not part of our standard physics today.
Mark's principle is talked about as an extraneous principle. It is not part of any standard theories
of physics today. There is a reason for that, which I, when I first realized this, I was really
amazed. Mark's principle implies that there is one universal frame, one universe. Because Mark's
principle takes effects of dynamics centrifugal force and things like that happens because of
some interaction with the rest of the matter in the universe. Whatever that interaction is,
since universe is one preference frame, accepting Mark's principle immediately implies
accepting an absolute frame like ether and so on. But once you accept an absolute frame,
the direct consequence is that propagation of light is Galilean. The velocity, relative
velocity of light will depend on the velocity of the observable. So, Mark's principle cannot
be incorporated in current physics without breaking Einstein's theory, without throwing away
Einstein's theory of relativity. So, because of this, though Einstein really, if you look at the
history of the development of general theory of relativity, how Einstein developed that theory.
For about five years, Einstein could not decide whether Mark's principle should be
taken as a basis of general theory of relativity or some other principle.
He tried incorporating Mark's principle into his theory of gravity, the general theory of
relativity. He could not because general theory of relativity was based on specific theory of
relativity, in which he already assumed the invariance of the velocity of light. But Mark's
principle needs an absolute frame, which will deny the basic postulate of special theory of
relativity. Therefore, he finally discarded Mark's principle. That is why Mark's principle is not
any more discussed in physics. So anyway, so the interaction, gravitational interaction with
all the matter in the universe provides just gravitational potential affecting everything
in the universe. So, if you take two clocks, one clock, which is stationary in this universe,
and another clock, which is moving in this universe, the gravitational potential experience
by the moving clock is slightly different from gravitational potential experience by the stationary
clock. And this can be calculated. Then you know what is the gravitational potential for a stationary
frame, which is, I said, the score of the velocity of light. You can very precisely calculate
what is the gravitational potential felt by a clock, which is moving.
And then it turns out that the time dilation, which we see, beyond some
accelerators and so on, or moving real clocks in the laboratory, all the time dilations,
which we see experimentally, match us exactly with the gravitational effect of the universe.
So therefore, we have an explanation of, explanation for
phenomena like time dilation, which is a prime effect of relativity we see in the laboratory.
Laboratory evidence for relativity is prime example is time dilation. We know that you don't
need Einstein's theory to explain that. We need only the gravity of the universe.
Similarly, for many, many physical effects in the laboratory, we can do this calculation,
the effect of the gravity of the cosmos, cosmic matter on what we see in the laboratory.
And for every instance, without any exception, it matches. The calculation matches what we see
in the laboratory. So every relativistic effect, which we see in the laboratory today,
can be explained as a consequence of the gravity of the matter in the universe.
I mean, that's a very, very profound framing of the interrelation
of the cosmos and the effect that the distant stars have upon us. It's a formulation that's
been around since Mox time, which he was writing in the 1920s. I think like 1870, 1880, those.
Right, because Einstein was familiar with it. And so it fell out of favor because relativity
offers these very tantalizing thought experiments and purports to put us into a,
personally, I think a more fantastical universe. Yes. And so now we're up against the challenge
where you have two theories where the mathematics give you, they can describe the same observed
phenomenon. Here, the mathematics is different. The mathematics is different, but the end point
is that you have an observation and you can use one set of mathematics, which is Einsteinian
relativity, to describe it. And then you have another set of mathematics, which refers to the
cosmos to describe it, but the observation is the same. And so this comes down to preference and
and belief really, like this is a cultural state of affairs. Here there is no choice.
Okay. Because we can see the objects in the universe with a telescope,
or various measurements related. So there are galaxies and so on. They are really there.
They are not an illusion. If those gravities, if those objects are there, there has to be
gravity of corresponding to those objects. There's no choice. Right? So if gravity is there,
those gravitational effects would be there. So now if Einstein was, if suppose Einstein's theory
is right, then you will have a doubled effects, one due to Einstein's formulation, whatever that is.
And this gravitational effect, which has to be there because there is also objects are really
there. But you cannot have both together because that will have doubled the effect. So you have to
make a choice between the two. And the choice is obvious because those objects are there.
You cannot choose Einstein's theory and say, though those objects are there, their gravity is not.
Again, you cannot make such a front. I love that it simplifies things and speaks in terms of
the real material objects. But gravity itself is still a nightmare, right? So why do two atoms
attract to one another at the end of the day? Do you spend any time thinking about that at a
material scale? Like what are the atoms actually doing to pull each other together?
Yes, you can ask the same question about electrical forces as well. Okay, so why
matter interacts with matter in this particular way is a deeper question. I would say it's a deeper
question. So for example, take the concept of a field, gravitational field, magnetic field,
and electric field. We cannot experience any of these fields. All we can see is when we put two
pieces of matter together with certain properties, they either attract or dribble,
there's a force, we can push one with another. Yeah, they're like maps of effects, essentially.
They're like predictable maps of effects. And because we like continuity, the concept of
continuity, we don't want, we don't like action at a distance. We like only when we see something
being pushed, we want to associate something local pushing it. By proposing, by postulating a field,
we can say, okay, I have a piece of matter, this creates a field, which is everywhere.
Then that field acts on another piece of matter. It's a nice concept. But every field,
whether it is gravitational, or electric or magnetic, they are all unobservable entities in
physics. Okay, they are postulated. They are what we would call free creations of our mind.
Right, they're abstract. Yeah, we can never verify their reality, the way we verify the
reality of matter, solid matter. So there is a gradation of realities, which we use in physics,
but there is no escape from that using such concepts. That's the way we understand it.
You think there's no escape, or do you think that we just haven't conceptualized it fully?
No. Any other way of talking about this becomes very complicated. There is a formulation of
interaction between two objects to matter, whether it's gravitation or
electrodynamics. There's a formulation of action at a distance. There are mathematical
formulations of how two objects interact without a field intervening, these two objects.
They are called action at a distance theories. But they are mathematically very formidable.
But the question is not necessarily whether or not there's not a field in between the two
objects. The question is, is the field made of something?
Yes, so how do we decide that? That's a problem. So now one thing which we seem to agree,
even that is debatable, but seem to agree is that this field contains energy.
And when we are talking about attraction of two objects, it's not so obvious. But when we talk
about a propagating wave, for example, you move an object, either a mass or a charge,
it generates electromagnetic wave, which can transfer energy from here to there.
Because we can do all this communication with electromagnetic waves. So there seems
to be some reason in proposing that there is a field which is independent of matter,
which can propagate, which can affect and so on. There seem to be reasonable concepts.
Again, it's not necessarily that there isn't the effects of the field. It's like,
when we talk about energy, well, I think one of my favorite definitions for energy is
material in motion or material that can be in terms of potential energy. It's material that
under other circumstances will go into motion. And so when we talk about energy in terms of
electromagnetic waves, all of the sudden, we kind of throw our hands up and we say, well,
the field itself is in motion, but the field is mathematical. The field is a set of measurements
that we have made. Yeah. So this would have been a puzzle, but for the relation which Einstein
himself clarified, equating energy and mass. So when he said there is a equivalence between
energy and mass, that in some way, not solved, but at least reconcile this problem,
that energy equivalence to some kind of a matter. So when you come to quantum theories,
for example, we talk about photons, particles of light, instead of just waves.
And there, at least, we think of photon as some localized quanta of energy,
very similar to matter, though it is not really as real as matter.
But at least we talk about quanta of energy very much like a particle.
In that sense, there is a close analogy. I agree that they are not the same.
They are not the same. It is not exactly matter in the normal sense, like an electron moving
for a fundamental particle moving. But photon is treated as a fundamental particle
with the properties of a particle today. I guess the thing that leaves me deeply
unsatisfied comes back to this human intuition, which is that if quantum fields,
when you come down to the bottom of it, are pure energy, which is determined by the measurements
made of, let's say, the zero point energy of the vacuum, or inside of a particle collider,
you have some kind of momentum transfer between the thing that you're measuring and your detector.
In the current models, those things are not material. And yet, they produce material
objects somehow. And there is this void where no one has yet figured out how to cross it,
because you have, on one hand, pure energy, and then on the other hand, you have tangible matter.
And it seems like people stopped looking because of this Michelson-Morley experiment.
They gave up on the static ether, and it seems very much impossible to explain these
action at distances without the material objects being in contact with one another somehow to
affect this momentum transfer. And the field stands in for that object, right? We're like,
look, there's a field in between them, so there's no action at a distance. Really,
it's the field that's propagating these effects. But it's like, how does the field become a material?
Yeah, but if you look at modern theoretical physics, it has gone even beyond this.
In fact, something which even a practicing physicist like me find a bit strange,
because field theories say that even particles are fields.
Electrons, protons, and various things are actually fields.
But they're particular excitation of the underlying field.
That's what that's, but that is only a theoretical formulation. These are just
our own creations. No, this is, this is the all this kind of concept evolved out of
mathematics. I see the theories further and further so that people could explain
everything in the unified some picture. This, that doesn't mean that what we created in our
theories is what is there in real nature. But this is how we treat everything today as fields.
And what if instead of fields, and instead of the static ether, we imagine that the atoms themselves
have, obviously they have some surface that we consider as the atom, right, the shell of the
electron or whatever it is for the chemist, but that there is some rarefied portion of the atom
beyond that shell, which connects them to their neighbors, which is imponderable, but is carried
with the atom wherever it moves. Then you have a dynamical ether that's not actually static as a
background. It can't be measured separately because it moves wherever the atoms move. And what if
there's a structure there still? What if we don't have to give up on material explanations for these
things? Yeah, sir. I mean, when you ask this question, I feel a bit strange. That's because
of another reason. See, today, we think of dynamics as consisting of matter,
fields, motion, and those kinds of concepts. However, there is a formulation of mechanics
due to William Roman Hamilton, Hamilton's formulation, Hamiltonian mechanics.
In the Hamiltonian mechanics, which came in the 1830s, the fundamental object there,
entity, is what is called action. So there is a principle of least action or stationary action
where you say the path of dynamics, the actual path of dynamics, is a path where
this quantity called action is minimized. And you can derive all dynamics, every aspect of
dynamics, whether it's electrodynamics or any other kind of dynamics from these action principles
using Hamiltonian formulation. Now, if you think of this action, what is this action? Is it something
like a field or something real? People have not spent much time thinking about it. It is still
used as a mathematical convenience. Because action without actors is sort of nonsensical
in our everyday conception. However, if you think about action, you see this principle
of least action works in real space and time. So you are saying there are various possible paths
in space and time. And one of those paths or one set of those paths is chosen,
cancelling all other paths possible. You know that a path cannot be cancelled with another path.
The only way you can cancel something is when you have something like a wave,
something which can go positive or negative. So there has to be something in real space and time
with the properties of waves so that you can cancel some paths and enhance some other paths.
If you think that way, something like action has to be a real step in real space and time.
Otherwise, how can action principle work? So the fact that action principle works in every
instance of physical dynamics, where it is standard particle mechanics or electrodynamics
or gravity or any other field theory, everywhere action principle works.
Then you might say, okay, action might be something in real space, we cannot feel it,
we cannot see it, we cannot experience, sense it.
But if such a thing is there as a real entity, it is around every atom, every particle and so on
as some real extended entity with the properties of a wave. So though your question was
not in this context, already we see that there is a possibility that there are things which we
cannot feel, sense and so on directly, but which could be really there in space and time
around matter, which controls all dynamics. And this is the greatest challenge of physics,
because physics is unseen. Physics is things that we have to spend so much time and effort
designing detectors and measurement apparatuses in order to be able to feel something,
which we then have to translate to some mental theoretical model. And biology doesn't work
in the same way. You can look through a microscope and you can see the structures as they go.
And so it forces it to be physical, it forces it to be material. And physics just doesn't
have that because it is so, so small and so undetectable that we are left with the limits
of imagination. Yeah, but at the same time, physics has an advantage that things don't change.
The same thing repeats every time you do. You create a situation,
everything happens in the same way, not like a living matter. Things are not changing.
So therefore, a consistent picture can be obtained by persistently probing something
the same way again and again. Here you mentioned this question of energy, energy of motion,
kinetic energy that we understand, something new, and we call it kinetic energy. But you
also mentioned potential energy. Now when you say potential, electric potential for example,
we cannot see a potential. What we can see is only the variation of a potential in space,
which we call a field, electric field when we say electric field. It's a variation of
electric potential in space. For example, we can, there are these demonstrations where we have
a room which is electrically elevated to 1000 volts. We can stand inside that room without
getting a truck because it's a constant potential. But if we test something with a different potential,
we'll get a truck. So potential which we use, it's a term which we use very often in physics,
but we cannot sense a potential. We cannot see a potential. What we can sense is only a
variation of the potential in space or a change of potential in time. A time variation of a potential
we can detect as a field. We can also detect a spatial variation of a potential as a force.
Electrical force and so on. So it's very much like this action in dynamics is very much like that.
We cannot feel action, but the spatial variation of action is what we call momentum.
In the Hamiltonian dynamics, the spatial variation of action is what is called momentum. Momentum,
we have a sense of what momentum is. Also, the time variation of action is what we call energy.
In dynamics. But unless the action has a reality, we cannot have a spatial variation of action
and a time dependence of action. So action must be real and is some extended object
around every material body and so on which controls all dynamics. So these are things which are still
unexplored sufficiently in physics. We know the mathematics. We know all the mathematical
expressions related to this. But what is the physical reality of these things? We are not
explored sufficiently. And I would say, go ahead. I think that's the perfect place to
pause for now. I think that's a beautiful realization. I think it points to a huge
conceptual body of work that has yet to come. Yes. Of explanation versus just description.
Yes. Description is easy. Description is easy because that is what we see in the laboratory,
phenomenon. When we see a lot of phenomena, we can say, we can describe it. We can even sort of
give a plausible framework, but explaining something starting from a small number of
premises without making a new premise for each explanation. That is where the power of theory,
physical theory comes. And whether it is a consistent theory or not, is again determined by
these crucial experiments. So it's a back and forth interaction between
sufficiently, cleverly designed experiments and this imagination, free creations of our mind.
I love that. I also, before we leave, I want to say how beautifully written your papers are.
You know, oftentimes, scientific papers are
abstruse, especially about physics. They can be very complex and heavy in the language,
but your prose is very clear. And the logic that the ideas follow is so beautifully laid out
that it was a joy to read your papers. So thank you for that. See the clarity. Clarity is the most
important when you want to communicate. Okay. And that comes with only a wish. One has to have
the desire to be clear. And the most clear expositions I have seen in my life is by Einstein.
If you read Einstein's writings, that clarity, and that's the kind of clarity one
desires to achieve. Of course, his language is very fine and all that, you know, achieving that
is difficult. But when I write a paper, I also try to ask people around me to see it and try to
explain it to me. I'm very keen that whatever I think of as a conceptual, even a deep thought
in physics, I should be able to explain to a schoolboy. I love that. I should be able to explain
because, or, okay, forget schoolboy, I should be able to explain to my parents, my sister or
brother or somebody, because they will ask me, what are you doing? I should be able to explain.
That's such a huge motivation for our work as well. Like when we were in graduate school,
we started, we were both studying electrical phenomena. And we came up against this question
of what is charge. And that doesn't have an explanation. It has a measurement. And that
was what set us on this path where we're exploring physics and trying to find theories that can
actually hold together for a full explanation because you can't talk to people about these ideas
if you can't explain them even to yourself. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Because, you know, finally,
why are we doing all this? You see, when we try to make a theory or when we try to think of physics,
why explanations in physics or any other science, that is for the whole community.
It is not for the, it's a personal, of course, personal desire is the first thing which comes.
You have a passion to understand. You want to understand, but understanding is not just for
yourself. Having understood, you want to talk about it to people around you, explain it,
students and various things like that. So achieving a certain level of clarity is very
important for me always. Good shines through. Yeah, you're doing a great job. Thank you so much.
And, and thanks for taking the time to, you know, get into some of these issues. I think that we
have made more sense of particularly a lot of these basic inforometer ideas that we've talked
around in the show. I think that we've gotten a lot more clarity. So I thank you for that.
By the way, before you go, if people want to find out more about you,
is there a way for them to, what's the best place? Should they read your papers,
do you have a website or how do you do this? There is a Wikipedia page. There's a Wikipedia page
with some information. I maintain a YouTube channel, though I have not updated it for some
time. I should do that with some of my talks and so on. Of course, I work in what is called a
Defense Institute of Advanced Technology in Pune in India. Earlier, I was in the Tata Institute
of Fundamental Research. So I have a website, one of those Google site website, again, it's not
updated. I will update. But then two years ago, I wrote a book called New Relativity in the
Gravitational Universe. It is published by Springer. So there is enough information on the web.
When you do a search, there is enough information about me, various places scattered maybe.
And so it's not difficult to find out more about me. And I always reply to emails and so on when
people write to me. It was really a very nice experience talking to you both. I really enjoyed
just talking to you on various things. Because this is what I will do when some of my friends come
here and sit. We talk about various things. And I learned from them. They want to learn from me
and so on. That's beautiful. That's what we're going for. Yeah, that's why we built this project
really. Because it's hard to find those kind of friends. So we reached out across the internet
to have these conversations. Yes, yes. I'm really glad you have met you. I hope this isn't our last
time meeting. Yes. Yeah, some other time we can talk a bit about quantum mechanics probably,
because that is conceptual issues. When you come to what one would call the unsold
conceptual issues, you always associate quantum physics with this unsold conceptual issues.
Today, I talked to you about this action and things like that. And it was not a random thought,
because that's the kind of thing which I very passionately following up.
Excellent. Let's do that. A couple of months down the line. I think we have a
beautiful calendar right now. Yeah, please. It's very reassuring to find people who are
thinking along your lines. I feel like the world is a saner, more legible place for having you in
it. And so thank you. Yeah. Thank you very much. Thank you. I'll see you again soon. Yeah, have a
great rest of your night. It's pretty late there. So thank you. Thank you and take care. Bye everybody.
See you later.